---
title: "Bioware"
date: 2023-08-19 12:10:00 -0400
categories: informatics
authors: ismaelc
status: draft
---

In this article I define **bioware**, a device that imitates body parts and behaves like another part of the body. All bioware are implants, but with a high imitation of biology, and with the sense of touch, temperature, and any other sense. For example, a heart implant that behaves with high precision as a heart, and that even responds to the sense of touch and to temperature, is considered bioware.

- **Bioware:** Device that imitates parts of the body with great biological accuracy, including the touch, temperature, and ideally all the behavior of the biological part. If the device is of an imagined and new biological part that doesn't exist genetically, it's a bioware only if the touch, temperature and the behavior are that of a normal biological part. A bioware can be seen as a device that perfectly replaces a biological part, or as an extension of the body.
- **Biowaretics:** Multidisciplinary area focused on developing bioware.
- **Lifehost:** Person or life form that has the referred bioware.

A bioware can be composed only of technological parts or be a mixture of technological and biological parts.

- **Pure bioware:** Bioware composed only of technological parts.
- **Mixed bioware:** Bioware composed both of technological parts and biological parts (tissues and cells). Bioware not containing cells, but chemical agents, aren't considered mixed bioware, but pure bioware.

- **Internal bioware:** The bioware is placed inside the body, it's not seen from outside. Example: Artificial heart.
- **External bioware:** The bioware is placed outside the body, it's like an extension of the body, and can be seen from outside. Example: Artificial wings.

A bioware can have one or more characteristics, of one or more of the following categories of characteristics:

- **Physiology:** A bioware that replaces partial or totally a physiological behavior. They are called **physiological bioware**. They can be called also **medical biowares** inside a medical context.
- **Protection:** A bioware that provides protection against external menaces, which can be part of nature and/or life forms. They are called **protection bioware**.
- **Offensive:** A bioware that enhances offensive capacities of the organism. They are called **offensive bioware**. The intentions of this article are not to increase weapons, but they are a kind of bioware and so they are also classified here.
- **Senses:** A bioware that provides or enhances senses. They are called **sense bioware**. If the sense bioware enhances the organism in order to add additional cognition, it's also considered a **transhumanist bioware**.
- **Brain:** A bioware that enhances or adds brain characteristics to the brain or to the individual, or that parallely behaves as one, but works independently of the brain of the organism. They are called **brain bioware**.

## Difference with synthetic organs

## Human enhancement technology

Apart from bioware, there exist other related areas that also extend the capacities of humans and life forms in general, which are the following:

- **Mind software:** Software that enhances the mind, or that provides features that extend its capacities. They aren't part of this category psychotherapeutic software, but instead only psychological software that is not intended to be therapeutic.
- **Synthetic organs:** Organs created artificially, cultured inside a laboratory.
- **Homunculogy:** This area of biology, that I too have started, can be also used to enhance human characteristics. It can be used, for example, to create technology that allows to change shape.

## How to create bioware

### Essential concepts

- **Biomaterial:** Material that can interact with biological systems without damaging it.
- **Industrial design:** Design of an industrial device. For bioware, it's used to create them.
- **Cell:** Central unit of the body that controls how it behaves and lives. A bioware can be composed only of biomaterials or of biomaterials and cells.
- **Nanoelectromechanical system:** Electromechanical system of nanoscale size.

## Bioware of organs

- **Bioware of heart:**
- **Bioware of lungs:**
- **Bioware of kidneys:**
- **Bioware of intestine:**
- **Bioware of stomach:**
- **Bioware of liver:**

## Bioware of eye

A **bioware of eye** can be created by joining biomaterials and cells together.

## Remote control protection

To allow a bioware to be controlled remotely is **very dangerous**, because the bioware can possibly be controlled then by a person different than the user. Then, a protection for the remote control is of big necessity for any bioware.

## Operational checks

An **operational check** allows to check that the bioware is behaving correctly, which means that it's operating as expected. An operational check can programmed to be executed by connecting the bioware wirelessly or with a cable. It's better to program operational checks to work only with a cable, and not with a wireless connection, because then wireless attacks can be avoided, which is important. That's because no user of bioware wants operational checks to be started by hackers remotely, without their consent and their awareness.
